Review of TreeFlow: Probabilistic modelling and automatic differentiation for phylogenetics
By: Swanepoel et al.
For: Systematic Biology

Fredrik Ronquist
2026-05-29

The paper presents TreeFlow, a python library for probabilistic modelling and automatic
differentiation with phylogenetic trees. Software that supports more flexible probabilistic
modelling approaches to statistical phylogenetics represents an important and promising
research direction, I believe. The paper is well written, and I find it fairly easy to follow even
though some parts are quite technical. The empirical examples indicate some promise with
respect to the reliability of results from variational inference. Also, the analyses of
computational speed show that the increased modeling flexibility comes with an overhead that
is acceptable, especially if optimized software is not available for the model of interest.

The one major concern I have is the brief description of the kappa-variation model. It leaves a
number of uncertainties concerning the structure of the model and how to interpret the
empirical results obtained from it. See detailed comments below for Figure 3 in the
manuscript. I would also suggest some expansion of the description of the software, like how
to install it, and where to start if you are interested in learning how to use it.
The remaining comments and suggestions are minor and should be relatively easy for the
authors to address.

Comments and suggestions:
L14: Inconsistent order of references (year or alphabetic?)
L74-78: “In other work …” This sentence is difficult to read, and seems grammatically
inconsistent if I understand it correctly. Please rewrite and simplify if possible.
L95-99: I think it might be appropriate to cite the work by Koptagel et al (2022) on
variational inference of phylogenies here: Koptagel, Hazal, Oskar Kviman, Harald Melin,
Negar Safinianaini, and Jens Lagergren. ‘VaiPhy: A Variational Inference Based Algorithm
for Phylogeny’. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 35 (December 2022):
14758–70.

L120ff: I think it would be helpful to provide a link here to the online documentation of
TreeFlow and the YAML format. I also think that readers might appreciate a few sentences on
how to best get started using TreeFlow. There is an online tutorial, I discovered, which might
be a good place to start after installing the software. Perhaps a note about this?
Fig. 1. “Developer API” is partly covered by the tensorflow.TensorArray node in the graph.
Please fix this!
L212-222: This paragraph is difficult to follow. Is it possible to provide a more intuitive
explanation for the quadratic cost?
Fig. 2. Some more details needed in the caption. I assume the gray area represents some
measure of Monte Carlo error for Beast 2 analyses, please specify. Is there no variance around
the TreeFlow distribution estimates or is the variance so small that it is not visible? Please
clarify in the caption.
L362. With “every lineage”, are the authors referring to every branch in the tree? Please
clarify.
L372-374. I think it would be advantageous to explain the step from importance sampling to
marginal likelihood estimates in one or two sentences, as this may not be clear to all readers.
Fig. 3. Text below the graph needs to be incorporated in the caption. I understood kappa to be
inferred per branch but this does not seem to be consistent with the graphs. Does “lineage
age” refer to the time duration (length) of the branch? If so, please use “branch length”
instead of “lineage age”, and use “Branch length” on the x axis. If lineage age does not refer
to branch length, then what does lineage age refer to? Please clarify. Is it that “Age” refers to
the median or ancestor or child age of the branch, and “Kappa” to the kappa estimate for the
branch? Or is the “Kappa” value some composite of the different values of kappa from the
node that represents the age to the tip of the tree? Or have I completely misunderstood the
model? Does it involve some model of change of kappa over time or at speciation events, or is
it a completely branch-independent kappa values model, as I guessed?
L383-386: “The growth in uncertainty in kappa estimates deeper in the tree…” I think this
sentence refers to age estimates and not kappa estimates (for which the pattern is the
opposite).
Fig. 4. Text in the graph needs to be moved to the caption.
L412-413. “The uncertainty…” The uncertainty appears to be significantly underestimated for
tree height and population size, but not for clock rate. Please reconsider this summary of the
results. Also, the uncertainty in the stationary frequency of T seems to be significantly
underestimated both in this example and the previous example. Any intuition why this might
be the case?

L438-440. “Convergence…” I think users need more instructions on how to properly monitor
convergence of TreeFlow VI.
L440-444. It is difficult to assess the computational efficiency comparison without more
details. The conclusion that TreeFlow VI provides “substantial speed improvements” does not
seem to be consistent with the reported time durations, unless the multiple preliminary runs in
Beast took a substantial amount of time (which might be the case for what I know). Perhaps
some more detailed justification of this conclusion?
Fig. 5: As a suggestion, would it not be better to show these results in four different plots
instead, one for each model, with the three different computational software as a separate line
in each plot? This would visualize the critical differences in slope between the different
software more clearly, I think.
L533-534. “TreeFlow’s scaling is certainly not worse…” But Table 1 gives a slope of 1.36 for
TreeFlow and 1.25 for bito/BEAGLE, which is worse as far as I can tell. But maybe the
difference is regarded as insignificant by the authors? Please justify the conclusion.

